=head1 NAME

dhcpd-snmp

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  $ dhcpd-snmp [--test] dhcpd-snmp.conf

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<dhcpd-snmp> is an extension for the Net-SNMP agent and the ISC DHCP
server. It allows you to monitor and track the address usage of your
dynamic IP address pools through SNMP.

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE

The configuration file defines the location of the F<dhcpd.leases>
file as well as the pools of which you want to access the lease
counts.

The file is in B<key: value> format and allows only two keys:

=over 8

=item B<leases>: C</var/lib/dhcp3/dhcpd.leases>

Location of the F<dhcpd.leases> file. This file needs to be accessible
by the script.

=item B<pool>: C<index>, C<description>, C<ip1-ip2, ip3-ip4...>

Defines a pool to monitor. C<index> is a unique numeric index,
C<description> a textual description of this pool, and C<ip1-ip2,
ip3-ip4, ...> defines the ranges of IP addresses belonging to this
pool.

=back

Since this extension is a persistent script, changes to the
configuration file require a restart of snmpd.

=head1 INSTALLATION

After installing the B<dhcpd-snmp> script and adapting the
configuration file, test if the configuration is valid:

  $ path/to/dhcpd-snmp --test path/to/dhcpd-snmp.conf

This will print per-pool stats.

If this works, it can be installed in Net-SNMP. To install it, the
following line needs to be inserted in the F<snmpd.conf> file:

  pass_persist .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2 path/to/dhcpd-snmp path/to/dhcpd-snmp.conf

Net-SNMP will need to be restarted after this change.

You should now be able to get the statistics using F<snmpwalk>, for example:

  $ snmpwalk host community .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2

This should give you a list of the statistics of your DHCP server.

=head2 RUNNING THE SCRIPT INTERACTIVELY

B<dhcpd-snmp> is a simple script which is run by Net-SNMP and which is
controlled using stdin/stdout. If you run it interactively, you can
control it as follows:

  PING

The script should return "PONG".

  get
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.1

The script should return three lines: the OID, "integer", and the
number of configured pools.

  get
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.2.2.1

OID, "string", and the name of your first address pool.

  get
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.2.4.1

OID, "integer", and the number of active leases.

Quit the dialog using CTRL-D.

=head1 MIB

The script returns the following variables:

  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.1: number of configured pools
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.2.<pool>: pool description
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.3.<pool>: size of the pool (number of addresses)
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.4.<pool>: active leases
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.5.<pool>: expired leases
  .1.3.6.1.4.1.21695.1.2.6.<pool>: available addresses (size - active leases)

For a complete MIB file see the C<mibs> directory in the source archive.

=head1 SECURITY

It is assumed that users of this script know how to properly secure
their snmpd. Please read the corresponding man pages on more
information about this.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2006-2015 Oliver Hitz

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307,
USA.

